PyCity Schools Analysis

1. Math is hard. For every one of the 15 schools we analyzed, more students passed the Reading test than the Math test, and the average Reading score is higher than the average Math score. There are no schools in this study where the average Math score is higher than the average Reading score, nor were there any schools in this study where more students passed the Math test than the Reading test. The differences are not always large, but they are consistent: For this district, at this time, with these district-wide standardized tests, Math is clearly harder than Reading. The 2 schools that come closest to parity between Math and Reading are Holden High School with only a .011709% difference between average Math and Reading scores and Pena High School where just 1.351351% more students passed the Reading test than the Math test. This is significant because both Holden and Pena are Charter schools.

2. Charter schools score better than District schools on the district-wide standardized tests. All 5 of the Highest-Performing Schools (by % Overall Passing) are Charter schools, and The 5 Bottom Performing Schools (By % Overall Passing) are all District schools. On average, 90.432244% of Charter school students but only 53.672208% of District school students passed both the Math and Reading portions of the district-wide standardized tests, even though District schools typically budget more money per student than Charter schools, leading us to conclude that

3. Money has not improved outcomes. A higher Per Student Budget has not produced higher scores or more students passing the district-wide standardized Math and Reading tests. In fact, the Spending Ranges (Per Student) demonstrates a negative correlation: student scores and passing rates decreased in each category as the Per Student Budget increased. We do not guarantee that more money produces poorer results because Rodriguez High School  which was the lowest performing school did not spend the most money, and the highest performing school, Cabrera High School did not spend the least. Money is not the most important factor; however,

4. Size does matter. The largest Charter school is Wilson High School with 2,283 students and an overall success rate of 90.58257%, and the smallest District school is Ford High School with 2,739 students and an overall success rate of 54.28989%. While we do not claim an increase of 456 students explains a 36.29268% drop in the overall passing rate, it is the most consistently significant factor in this study. When evaluating the Scores by School Size, and particularly the School Summary, we find that there isn t much difference between the outcomes from small school with fewer than 1,000 students and medium schools with 1,000   2,000 students. The medium sized Charter schools perform just less than 1 percent better than the smaller Charter schools; however, once we cross over from the medium sized Charter schools to the larger District schools, the situation changes dramatically. 

These numbers do not explain why larger District schools cost the city more money while Charter schools yield better outcomes on the district-wide standardized Math and Reading tests.
